Add blog post on the v5 gem releases (#92)
x-govuk/x-govuk.github.io: app/posts/releasing-rails-libraries-for-version-5.md

---
title: Releasing the Rails libraries for version 5 of the GOV.UK Design System
description: Notes on how the Rails libraries for the GOV.UK Design System are developed and the work required to support version 5
date: 2024-01-10
author:
  name: Peter Yates
  url: https://github.com/peteryates
---

> Version 5 of the GOV.UK Design System was released on December 8th 2023. Half an hour later, we released version 5 of the x-govuk [form builder](https://govuk-form-builder.netlify.app/) and [components](https://govuk-components.netlify.app/) libraries.

Reviewer: Use GOV.UK style for dates:

```suggestion
Version 5 of the GOV.UK Design System was released on 8 December 2023. Half an hour later, we released version 5 of the x-govuk [form builder](https://govuk-form-builder.netlify.app/) and [components](https://govuk-components.netlify.app/) libraries.
```

> The short turnaround time might suggest it was a quick job, but work on the included features started in May and we've made some significant improvements since then.

Reviewer: Smart quote for smart people. (There are likely others that need updating)

```suggestion
The short turnaround time might suggest it was a quick job, but work on the included features started in May and we’ve made some significant improvements since then.
```

Author: Why update them when the build progress automatically fixes them (thanks `smartypants`!)

Reviewer: It’s a good question, and touches on an existential crisis. Perhaps we leave these and stop trying to catch issues in PRs (and I can update previous posts to use ASCII to satisfy my OCD needs)

Reviewer 2: @paulrobertlloyd that really is OCD! Maybe we should follow the principle of being lax about input (curly or straight quotes) and strict about output...? 😄

Reviewer: I’ve really got a lot of issues…

![Scene from ‘I’m Alan Partidge’ where he responds with: “yeah, of What Car? Magazine“."](https://img.gifglobe.com/grabs/partridgecloud/S02E06/gif/vPCVHa3Qnqqr.gif)

For the uninitiated, the form builder and components libraries are implementations of the [GOV.UK Design System](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/) for [Ruby on Rails](https://rubyonrails.org/), one of the most popular web frameworks used across government.

Without these and other projects like it, teams working on GOV.UK services would need to implement all the patterns and behaviour described in the design system themselves. This would be huge a waste of effort and slow down delivery to a crawl.

> Time spent on [boilerplate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boilerplate_code) is time spent not focussing on user needs.

> When working on anything that's used by lots of teams, like [referring serious teacher misconduct](https://refer-serious-misconduct.education.gov.uk), [whistleblowing at a company](https://make-a-business-whistleblower-report.service.gov.uk/) or even [GOV.UK forms itself](https://www.forms.service.gov.uk/), there's a great deal of pressure not to break anything. This responsibility forces us to make changes with a degree of caution and to rigorously test and review.

Reviewer: Product name is capitalised:

```suggestion
When working on anything that's used by lots of teams, like [referring serious teacher misconduct](https://refer-serious-misconduct.education.gov.uk), [whistleblowing at a company](https://make-a-business-whistleblower-report.service.gov.uk/) or even [GOV.UK Forms itself](https://www.forms.service.gov.uk/), there's a great deal of pressure not to break anything. This responsibility forces us to make changes with a degree of caution and to rigorously test and review.
```

There are two main reasons for us making changes:

> * **following upstream changes** --- like adding a new GOV.UK component or adding support for a new version of Ruby or Rails
> * **improvements we feel make the library better** --- like adding features, tidying code or making the tests run faster

Reviewer: We can use Unicode characters (although I’m constantly in debate with myself about how much Markdown should only use ASCII characters or not)

```suggestion
* **following upstream changes** — like adding a new GOV.UK component or adding support for a new version of Ruby or Rails
* **improvements we feel make the library better** — like adding features, tidying code or making the tests run faster
```

> * **following upstream changes** --- like adding a new GOV.UK component or adding support for a new version of Ruby or Rails
> * **improvements we feel make the library better** --- like adding features, tidying code or making the tests run faster

Reviewer: Prettier will likely flag:

```suggestion
- **following upstream changes** --- like adding a new GOV.UK component or adding support for a new version of Ruby or Rails
- **improvements we feel make the library better** --- like adding features, tidying code or making the tests run faster
```

Conveniently, the two main updates in version 5 fit squarely into these categories.

## The task list

> The [GOV.UK design system task list component](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/components/task-list/) has been a long time in the making with discussions [stretching back to 2018](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-design-system-backlog/issues/72). However, thanks to Frankie Roberto and the GOV.UK design system team's tireless efforts, [the PR](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-frontend/pull/2261) was finally approved and merged in June.

Reviewer: Product name is capitalised:

```suggestion
The [GOV.UK Design System task list component](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/components/task-list/) has been a long time in the making with discussions [stretching back to 2018](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-design-system-backlog/issues/72). However, thanks to Frankie Roberto and the GOV.UK Design System team's tireless efforts, [the PR](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-frontend/pull/2261) was finally approved and merged in June.
```

> The [GOV.UK design system task list component](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/components/task-list/) has been a long time in the making with discussions [stretching back to 2018](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-design-system-backlog/issues/72). However, thanks to Frankie Roberto and the GOV.UK design system team's tireless efforts, [the PR](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-frontend/pull/2261) was finally approved and merged in June.

Reviewer: Avoid abbreviations where possible:

```suggestion
The [GOV.UK design system task list component](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/components/task-list/) has been a long time in the making with discussions [stretching back to 2018](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-design-system-backlog/issues/72). However, thanks to Frankie Roberto and the GOV.UK design system team's tireless efforts, [the pull request](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-frontend/pull/2261) was finally approved and merged in June.
```

Task lists are intended to help users manage many tasks, especially when the user:

* might not be able to do them all in one sitting
* is able to complete them in any order

> Like with the other components, the Rails implementation borrows heavily from the GOV.UK design system reference, but translates it into an syntax that will be immediately familiar to Ruby on Rails developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like with the other components, the Rails implementation borrows heavily from the GOV.UK Design System reference, but translates it into an syntax that will be immediately familiar to Ruby on Rails developers.
```

```erb
<h2 class="govuk-heading-m">Confirm your identity</h2>

<%=
  govuk_task_list(id_prefix: "about-you") do |task_list|
    task_list.with_item do |item|
      item.with_title(text: "Personal details")
      item.with_status do
        govuk_tag(text: "Complete", colour: "green")
      end
    end
    task_list.with_item do |item|
      item.with_title(text: "Contact details")
      item.with_status do
        govuk_tag(text: "Not started yet", colour: "Red")
      end
    end
    task_list.with_item(cannot_start_yet: true) do |item|
      item.with_title(
        text: "Identity check",
        hint: <<~HINT
          We need your personal and contact details in order
          to begin confirming your identity
        HINT
      )
      item.with_status(text: "Cannot start")
    end
  end
%>
```

The above snippet will render this task list:

> ![A GOV.UK design system task list with entries for personal and contact details, and a greyed out identity check task that cannot yet be started](/assets/posts/releasing-rails-libraries-for-version-5/rendered-task-list.png)

Reviewer: Image is missing from this pull request.

Still, opening links in a new tab was something I wanted to address. It's more complicated than the other modifiers like `no_underline` because it adds multiple new attributes to links. Developers often forget the `rel` attribute, leaving users open to [reverse tabnabbing](https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/Reverse_Tabnabbing). We can provide real value for users by supporting this feature.

In the new version, all of the design system options for links and buttons are represented by keyword arguments. They allow us to [support a large number of parameters](https://govuk-components.netlify.app/helpers/link/) while keeping [the code](https://github.com/x-govuk/govuk-components/blob/main/app/helpers/govuk_link_helper.rb) clean and succinct.

Now developers can reliably build complex link markup with confidence:

```erb
<%= govuk_link_to(
  "View",
  "/my-profile",
  visually_hidden_suffix: "my profile",
  new_tab: true,
  no_visited_state: true
) %>

<!-- becomes -->

<a class="govuk-link govuk-link--no-visited-state" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">
  View<span class="govuk-visually-hidden"> my profile</span>
</a>

> ```

Reviewer: Is there a concluding paragraph we can add to this post, as it seems to end abruptly. Maybe link to the documentation site and/or the repo to provide feedback?

Reviewer 2: Agree, it does end slightly abruptly. Maybe a call for feedback and/or a suggestion that the project will continue to both iterate the syntax and follow upstream changes to the design system?

---
title: Releasing the Rails libraries for version 5 of the GOV.UK Design System
description: Notes on how the Rails libraries for the GOV.UK Design System are developed and the work required to support version 5
date: 2024-01-10
author:
  name: Peter Yates
  url: https://github.com/peteryates
image:
  src: /assets/posts/releasing-rails-libraries-for-version-5/illustration.png
  alt: Numeral 5, with a background of coloured stripes based on the shape of the number.
  opengraphImage: true
---

Version 5 of the GOV.UK Design System was released on December 8th 2023. Half an hour later, we released version 5 of the x-govuk [form builder](https://govuk-form-builder.netlify.app/) and [components](https://govuk-components.netlify.app/) libraries.

The short turnaround time might suggest it was a quick job, but work on the included features started in May and we've made some significant improvements since then.

> For the uninitiated, the form builder and components libraries are implementations of the [GOV.UK Design System](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/) for [Ruby on Rails](https://rubyonrails.org/), one of the most popular web frameworks used across government.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The form builder and components libraries are implementations of the [GOV.UK Design System](https://design-system.service.gov.uk/) for [Ruby on Rails](https://rubyonrails.org/), one of the most popular web frameworks used across government.
```

        hint: <<~HINT
          We need your personal and contact details in order
          to begin confirming your identity
        HINT
      )
      item.with_status(text: "Cannot start")
    end
  end
%>
```

The above snippet will render this task list:

![A GOV.UK design system task list with entries for personal and contact details, and a greyed out identity check task that cannot yet be started](/assets/posts/releasing-rails-libraries-for-version-5/rendered-task-list.png)

## New link and button helpers

The govuk-components link and button helpers are probably the most widely used feature offered by the gem.

Their role is to take `some text` and `#a-hyperlink` and generate a link with design system classes like `govuk-link`, so:

```erb
<%= govuk_link_to("some text", "#a-hyperlink") %>

<!-- or -->

<%= govuk_link_to("#a-hyperlink") do %>
  some text
<% end %>

<!-- becomes -->

<a class="govuk-link" href="#a-hyperlink">some text</a>
```

In November 2022 [I tried to add a new feature](https://github.com/x-govuk/govuk-components/pull/363) to `govuk_link_to` which allowed developers to call it with `new_tab: true`, and the resulting link would open pages in a new tab.

> Unfortunately [I had to revert the change shortly afterwards](https://github.com/x-govuk/govuk-components/pull/399) because mixing new positional keyword arguments, which were added to Ruby in 2019 with Rails' link helpers, which haven't really changed since 2004, caused lots of problems. Thankfully we uncovered these in our pre-release testing so didn't break anything important.

Reviewer 2: I found this paragraph slightly confusing - do you mean "mixing keyword arguments _with_ positional arguments"?

Author: Yeah this one's a nightmare, will redo

Still, opening links in a new tab was something I wanted to address. It's more complicated than the other modifiers like `no_underline` because it adds multiple new attributes to links. Developers often forget the `rel` attribute, leaving users open to [reverse tabnabbing](https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/Reverse_Tabnabbing). We can provide real value for users by supporting this feature.

In the new version, all of the design system options for links and buttons are represented by keyword arguments. They allow us to [support a large number of parameters](https://govuk-components.netlify.app/helpers/link/) while keeping [the code](https://github.com/x-govuk/govuk-components/blob/main/app/helpers/govuk_link_helper.rb) clean and succinct.

Now developers can reliably build complex link markup with confidence:

```erb
<%= govuk_link_to(
  "View",
  "/my-profile",
  visually_hidden_suffix: "my profile",
  new_tab: true,
  no_visited_state: true
) %>

<!-- becomes -->

<a class="govuk-link govuk-link--no-visited-state" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">
  View<span class="govuk-visually-hidden"> my profile</span>
</a>
```

## What's next

> Now version 5 is released we'll slow the pace for a while and let the dust settle. This should give developers the opportunity to try out the new features and provide feedback or report bugs.

Reviewer 2: Make this slightly more direct? Should we say how to report bugs/give feedback (ie link to GitHub issues?)

```suggestion
Now version 5 is released, we'll slow the pace for a while and let the dust settle to give you the opportunity to try out the new features.

Please report any bugs, and give us your feedback.
```
